

     I don't think that any of my adventures with Mr. Sherlock Holmes
     opened quite so abruptly, or so dramatically, as that which I
     associate with The Three Gables. I had not seen Holmes for some days
     and had no idea of the new channel into which his activities had been
     directed. He was in a chatty mood that morning, however, and had just
     settled me into the well-worn low armchair on one side of the fire,
     while he had curled down with his pipe in his mouth upon the opposite
     chair, when our visitor arrived. If I had said that a mad bull had
     arrived it would give a clearer impression of what occurred.
     The door had flown open and a huge negro had burst into the room. He
     would have been a comic figure if he had not been terrific, for he
     was dressed in a very loud gray check suit with a flowing
     salmon-coloured tie. His broad face and flattened nose were thrust
     forward, as his sullen dark eyes, with a smouldering gleam of malice
     in them, turned from one of us to the other.

     "Which of you gen'l'men is Masser Holmes" he asked.

     Holmes raised his pipe with a languid smile.

     "Oh! it's you, is it?" said our visitor, coming with an unpleasant,
     stealthy step round the angle of the table. "See here, Masser Holmes,
     you keep your hands out of other folks' business. Leave folks to
     manage their own affairs. Got that, Masser Holmes?"

     "Keep on talking," said Holmes. "It's fine."

     "Oh! it's fine, is it?" growled the savage. "It won't be so damn fine
     if I have to trim you up a bit. I've handled your kind before now,
     and they didn't look fine when I was through with them. Look at that,
     Masser Holmes!"

     He swung a huge knotted lump of a fist under my friend's nose. Holmes
     examined it closely with an air of great interest. "Were you born
     so?" he asked. "Or did it come by degrees?"

     It may have been the icy coolness of my friend, or it may have been
     the slight clatter which I made as I picked up the poker. In any
     case, our visitor's manner became less flamboyant.

     "Well, I've given you fair warnin'," said he. "I've a friend that's
     interested out Harrow way--you know what I'm meaning--and he don't
     intend to have no buttin' in by you. Got that? You ain't the law, and
     I ain't the law either, and if you come in I'll be on hand also.
     Don't you forget it."

     "I've wanted to meet you for some time," said Holmes. "I won't ask
     you to sit down, for I don't like the smell of you, but aren't you
     Steve Dixie, the bruiser?"

     "That's my name, Masser Holmes, and you'll get put through it for
     sure if you give me any lip."

     "It is certainly the last thing you need," said Holmes, staring at
     our visitor's hideous mouth. "But it was the killing of young Perkins
     outside the Holborn Bar-- What! you're not going?"

     The negro had sprung back, and his face was leaden. "I won't listen
     to no such talk," said he. "What have I to do with this 'ere Perkins,
     Masser Holmes? I was trainin' at the Bull Ring in Birmingham when
     this boy done gone get into trouble."

     "Yes, you'll tell the magistrate about it, Steve," said Holmes. "I've
     been watching you and Barney Stockdale--"

     "So help me the Lord! Masser Holmes--"

     "That's enough. Get out of it. I'll pick you up when I want you."

     "Good-mornin', Masser Holmes. I hope there ain't no hard feelin's
     about this 'ere visit?"

     "There will be unless you tell me who sent you."

     "Why, there ain't no secret about that, Masser Holmes. It was that
     same gen'l'man that you have just done gone mention."

     "And who set him on to it?"

     "S'elp me. I don't know, Masser Holmes. He just say, 'Steve, you go
     see Mr. Holmes, and tell him his life ain't safe if he go down Harrow
     way.' That's the whole truth." Without waiting for any further
     questioning, our visitor bolted out of the room almost as
     precipitately as he had entered. Holmes knocked out the ashes of his
     pipe with a quiet chuckle.

     "I am glad you were not forced to break his woolly head, Watson. I
     observed your manoeuvres with the poker. But he is really rather a
     harmless fellow, a great muscular, foolish, blustering baby, and
     easily cowed, as you have seen. He is one of the Spencer John gang
     and has taken part in some dirty work of late which I may clear up
     when I have time. His immediate principal, Barney, is a more astute
     person. They specialize in assaults, intimidation, and the like. What
     I want to know is, who is at the back of them on this particular
     occasion?"

     "But why do they want to intimidate you?"

     "It is this Harrow Weald case. It decides me to look into the matter,
     for if it is worth anyone's while to take so much trouble, there must
     be something in it."

     "But what is it?"

     "I was going to tell you when we had this comic interlude. Here is
     Mrs. Maberley's note. If you care to come with me we will wire her
     and go out at once."

     Dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes [I read]:
     I have had a succession of strange incidents occur to me in
     connection with this house, and I should much value your advice. You
     would find me at home any time to-morrow. The house is within a short
     walk of the Weald Station. I believe that my late husband, Mortimer
     Maberley, was one of your early clients.
     Yours faithfully,
     Mary Maberley

     The address was "The Three Gables, Harrow Weald."

     "So that's that!" said Holmes. "And now, if you can spare the time,
     Watson, we will get upon our way."

     A short railway journey, and a shorter drive, brought us to the
     house, a brick and timber villa, standing in its own acre of
     undeveloped grassland. Three small projections above the upper
     windows made a feeble attempt to justify its name. Behind was a grove
     of melancholy, half-grown pines, and the whole aspect of the place
     was poor and depressing. None the less, we found the house to be well
     furnished, and the lady who received us was a most engaging elderly
     person, who bore every mark of refinement and culture.

     "I remember your husband well, madam," said Holmes, "though it is
     some years since he used my services in some trifling matter."

     "Probably you would be more familiar with the name of my son
     Douglas."

     Holmes looked at her with great interest.

     "Dear me! Are you the mother of Douglas Maberley? I knew him
     slightly. But of course all London knew him. What a magnificent
     creature he was! Where is he now?"

     "Dead, Mr. Holmes, dead! He was attache at Rome, and he died there of
     pneumonia last month."

     "I am sorry. One could not connect death with such a man. I have
     never known anyone so vitally alive. He lived intensely--every fibre
     of him!"

     "Too intensely, Mr. Holmes. That was the ruin of him. You remember
     him as he was--debonair and splendid. You did not see the moody,
     morose, brooding creature into which he developed. His heart was
     broken. In a single month I seemed to see my gallant boy turn into a
     worn-out cynical man."

     "A love affair--a woman?"

     "Or a fiend. Well, it was not to talk of my poor lad that I asked you
     to come, Mr. Holmes."

     "Dr. Watson and I are at your service."

     "There have been some very strange happenings. I have been in this
     house more than a year now, and as I wished to lead a retired life I
     have seen little of my neighbours. Three days ago I had a call from a
     man who said that he was a house agent. He said that this house would
     exactly suit a client of his, and that if I would part with it money
     would be no object. It seemed to me very strange as there are several
     empty houses on the market which appear to be equally eligible, but
     naturally I was interested in what he said. I therefore named a price
     which was five hundred pounds more than I gave. He at once closed
     with the offer, but added that his client desired to buy the
     furniture as well and would I put a price upon it. Some of this
     furniture is from my old home, and it is, as you see, very good, so
     that I named a good round sum. To this also he at once agreed. I had
     always wanted to travel, and the bargain was so good a one that it
     really seemed that I should be my own mistress for the rest of my
     life.

     "Yesterday the man arrived with the agreement all drawn out. Luckily
     I showed it to Mr. Sutro, my lawyer, who lives in Harrow. He said to
     me, 'This is a very strange document. Are you aware that if you sign
     it you could not legally take anything out of the house--not even
     your own private possessions?' When the man came again in the evening
     I pointed this out, and I said that I meant only to sell the
     furniture.

     "'No, no, everything,' said he.

     "'But my clothes? My jewels?'

     "'Well, well, some concession might be made for your personal
     effects. But nothing shall go out of the house unchecked. My client
     is a very liberal man, but he has his fads and his own way of doing
     things. It is everything or nothing with him.'

     "'Then it must be nothing,' said I. And there the matter was left,
     but the whole thing seemed to me to be so unusual that I thought--"

     Here we had a very extraordinary interruption.

     Holmes raised his hand for silence. Then he strode across the room,
     flung open the door, and dragged in a great gaunt woman whom he had
     seized by the shoulder. She entered with ungainly struggle like some
     huge awkward chicken, torn, squawking, out of its coop.

     "Leave me alone! What are you a-doin' of?" she screeched.

     "Why, Susan, what is this?"

     "Well, ma'am, I was comin' in to ask if the visitors was stayin' for
     lunch when this man jumped out at me."

     "I have been listening to her for the last five minutes, but did not
     wish to interrupt your most interesting narrative. Just a little
     wheezy, Susan, are you not? You breathe too heavily for that kind of
     work."

     Susan turned a sulky but amazed face upon her captor. "Who be you,
     anyhow, and what right have you a-pullin' me about like this?"

     "It was merely that I wished to ask a question in your presence. Did
     you, Mrs. Maberley, mention to anyone that you were going to write to
     me and consult me?"

     "No, Mr. Holmes, I did not."

     "Who posted your letter?"

     "Susan did."

     "Exactly. Now, Susan, to whom was it that you wrote or sent a message
     to say that your mistress was asking advice from me?"

     "It's a lie. I sent no message."

     "Now, Susan, wheezy people may not live long, you know. It's a wicked
     thing to tell fibs. Whom did you tell?"

     "Susan!" cried her mistress, "I believe you are a bad, treacherous
     woman. I remember now that I saw you speaking to someone over the
     hedge."

     "That was my own business," said the woman sullenly.

     "Suppose I tell you that it was Barney Stockdale to whom you spoke?"
     said Holmes.

     "Well, if you know, what do you want to ask for?"

     "I was not sure, but I know now. Well now, Susan, it will be worth
     ten pounds to you if you will tell me who is at the back of Barney."

     "Someone that could lay down a thousand pounds for every ten you have
     in the world."

     "So, a rich man? No; you smiled--a rich woman. Now we have got so
     far, you may as well give the name and earn the tenner."

     "I'll see you in hell first."

     "Oh, Susan! Language!"

     "I am clearing out of here. I've had enough of you all. I'll send for
     my box to-morrow." She flounced for the door.

     "Good-bye, Susan. Paregoric is the stuff... Now," he continued,
     turning suddenly from lively to severe when the door had closed
     behind the flushed and angry woman, "this gang means business. Look
     how close they play the game. Your letter to me had the 10 P. M.
     postmark. And yet Susan passes the word to Barney. Barney has time to
     go to his employer and get instructions; he or she--I incline to the
     latter from Susan's grin when she thought I had blundered--forms a
     plan. Black Steve is called in, and I am warned off by eleven o'clock
     next morning. That's quick work, you know."

     "But what do they want?"

     "Yes, that's the question. Who had the house before you?"

     "A retired sea captain called Ferguson."

     "Anything remarkable about him?"

     "Not that ever I heard of."

     "I was wondering whether he could have buried something. Of course,
     when people bury treasure nowadays they do it in the Post-Office
     bank. But there are always some lunatics about. It would be a dull
     world without them. At first I thought of some buried valuable. But
     why, in that case, should they want your furniture? You don't happen
     to have a Raphael or a first folio Shakespeare without knowing it?"

     "No, I don't think I have anything rarer than a Crown Derby tea-set."

     "That would hardly justify all this mystery. Besides, why should they
     not openly state what they want? If they covet your tea-set, they can
     surely offer a price for it without buying you out, lock, stock, and
     barrel. No, as I read it, there is something which you do not know
     that you have, and which you would not give up if you did know."

     "That is how I read it," said I.

     "Dr. Watson agrees, so that settles it."

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, what can it be?"

     "Let us see whether by this purely mental analysis we can get it to a
     finer point. You have been in this house a year."

     "Nearly two."

     "All the better. During this long period no one wants anything from
     you. Now suddenly within three or four days you have urgent demands.
     What would you gather from that?"

     "It can only mean," said I, "that the object, whatever it may be, has
     only just come into the house."

     "Settled once again," said Holmes. "Now, Mrs. Maberley, has any
     object just arrived?"

     "No, I have bought nothing new this year."

     "Indeed! That is very remarkable. Well, I think we had best let
     matters develop a little further until we have clearer data. Is that
     lawyer of yours a capable man?"

     "Mr. Sutro is most capable."

     "Have you another maid, or was the fair Susan, who has just banged
     your front door, alone?"

     "I have a young girl."

     "Try and get Sutro to spend a night or two in the house. You might
     possibly want protection."

     "Against whom?"

     "Who knows? The matter is certainly obscure. If I can't find what
     they are after, I must approach the matter from the other end and try
     to get at the principal. Did this house-agent man give any address?"

     "Simply his card and occupation. Haines-Johnson, Auctioneer and
     Valuer."

     "I don't think we shall find him in the directory. Honest business
     men don't conceal their place of business. Well, you will let me know
     any fresh development. I have taken up your case, and you may rely
     upon it that I shall see it through."

     As we passed through the hall Holmes's eyes, which missed nothing,
     lighted upon several trunks and cases which were piled in a corner.
     The labels shone out upon them.

     "'Milano.' 'Lucerne.' These are from Italy."

     "They are poor Douglas's things."

     "You have not unpacked them? How long have you had them?"

     "They arrived last week."

     "But you said--why, surely this might be the missing link. How do we
     know that there is not something of value there?"

     "There could not possibly be, Mr. Holmes. Poor Douglas had only his
     pay and a small annuity. What could he have of value?"

     Holmes was lost in thought.

     "Delay no longer, Mrs. Maberley," he said at last. "Have these things
     taken upstairs to your bedroom. Examine them as soon as possible and
     see what they contain. I will come to-morrow and hear your report."

     It was quite evident that The Three Gables was under very close
     surveillance, for as we came round the high hedge at the end of the
     lane there was the negro prize-fighter standing in the shadow. We
     came on him quite suddenly, and a grim and menacing figure he looked
     in that lonely place. Holmes clapped his hand to his pocket.

     "Lookin' for your gun, Masser Holmes?"

     "No, for my scent-bottle, Steve."

     "You are funny, Masser Holmes, ain't you?"

     "It won't be funny for you, Steve, if I get after you. I gave you
     fair warning this morning."

     "Well, Masser Holmes, I done gone think over what you said, and I
     don't want no more talk about that affair of Masser Perkins. S'pose I
     can help you, Masser Holmes, I will."

     "Well, then, tell me who is behind you on this job."

     "So help me the Lord! Masser Holmes, I told you the truth before. I
     don't know. My boss Barney gives me orders and that's all."

     "Well, just bear in mind, Steve, that the lady in that house, and
     everything under that roof, is under my protection. Don't forget it."

     "All right, Masser Holmes. I'll remember."

     "I've got him thoroughly frightened for his own skin, Watson," Holmes
     remarked as we walked on. "I think he would double-cross his employer
     if he knew who he was. It was lucky I had some knowledge of the
     Spencer John crowd, and that Steve was one of them. Now, Watson, this
     is a case for Langdale Pike, and I am going to see him now. When I
     get back I may be clearer in the matter."

     I saw no more of Holmes during the day, but I could well imagine how
     he spent it, for Langdale Pike was his human book of reference upon
     all matters of social scandal. This strange, languid creature spent
     his waking hours in the bow window of a St. James's Street club and
     was the receiving-station as well as the transmitter for all the
     gossip of the metropolis. He made, it was said, a four-figure income
     by the paragraphs which he contributed every week to the garbage
     papers which cater to an inquisitive public. If ever, far down in the
     turbid depths of London life, there was some strange swirl or eddy,
     it was marked with automatic exactness by this human dial upon the
     surface. Holmes discreetly helped Langdale to knowledge, and on
     occasion was helped in turn.

     When I met my friend in his room early next morning, I was conscious
     from his bearing that all was well, but none the less a most
     unpleasant surprise was awaiting us. It took the shape of the
     following telegram:

     Please come out at once. Client's house burgled in the night. Police
     in possession.
     Sutro.

     Holmes whistled. "The drama has come to a crisis, and quicker than I
     had expected. There is a great driving-power at the back of this
     business, Watson, which does not surprise me after what I have heard.
     This Sutro, of course, is her lawyer. I made a mistake, I fear, in
     not asking you to spend the night on guard. This fellow has clearly
     proved a broken reed. Well, there is nothing for it but another
     journey to Harrow Weald."

     We found The Three Gables a very different establishment to the
     orderly household of the previous day. A small group of idlers had
     assembled at the garden gate, while a couple of constables were
     examining the windows and the geranium beds. Within we met a gray old
     gentleman, who introduced himself as the lawyer, together with a
     bustling, rubicund inspector, who greeted Holmes as an old friend.

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, no chance for you in this case, I'm afraid. Just a
     common, ordinary burglary, and well within the capacity of the poor
     old police. No experts need apply."

     "I am sure the case is in very good hands," said Holmes. "Merely a
     common burglary, you say?"

     "Quite so. We know pretty well who the men are and where to find
     them. It is that gang of Barney Stockdale, with the big nigger in
     it--they've been seen about here."

     "Excellent! What did they get?"

     "Well, they don't seem to have got much. Mrs. Maberley was
     chloroformed and the house was-- Ah! here is the lady herself."

     Our friend of yesterday, looking very pale and ill, had entered the
     room, leaning upon a little maidservant.

     "You gave me good advice, Mr. Holmes," said she, smiling ruefully.
     "Alas, I did not take it! I did not wish to trouble Mr. Sutro, and so
     I was unprotected."

     "I only heard of it this morning," the lawyer explained.

     "Mr. Holmes advised me to have some friend in the house. I neglected
     his advice, and I have paid for it."

     "You look wretchedly ill," said Holmes. "Perhaps you are hardly equal
     to telling me what occurred."

     "It is all here," said the inspector, tapping a bulky notebook.

     "Still, if the lady is not too exhausted--"

     "There is really so little to tell. I have no doubt that wicked Susan
     had planned an entrance for them. They must have known the house to
     an inch. I was conscious for a moment of the chloroform rag which was
     thrust over my mouth, but I have no notion how long I may have been
     senseless. When I woke, one man was at the bedside and another was
     rising with a bundle in his hand from among my son's baggage, which
     was partially opened and littered over the floor. Before he could get
     away I sprang up and seized him."

     "You took a big risk," said the inspector.

     "I clung to him, but he shook me off, and the other may have struck
     me, for I can remember no more. Mary the maid heard the noise and
     began screaming out of the window. That brought the police, but the
     rascals had got away."

     "What did they take?"

     "Well, I don't think there is anything of value missing. I am sure
     there was nothing in my son's trunks."

     "Did the men leave no clue?"

     "There was one sheet of paper which I may have torn from the man that
     I grasped. It was lying all crumpled on the floor. It is in my son's
     handwriting."

     "Which means that it is not of much use," said the inspector. "Now if
     it had been in the burglar's--"

     "Exactly," said Holmes. "What rugged common sense! None the less, I
     should be curious to see it."

     The inspector drew a folded sheet of foolscap from his pocketbook.

     "I never pass anything, however trifling," said he with some
     pomposity. "That is my advice to you, Mr. Holmes. In twenty-five
     years' experience I have learned my lesson. There is always the
     chance of finger-marks or something."

     Holmes inspected the sheet of paper.

     "What do you make of it, Inspector?"

     "Seems to be the end of some queer novel, so far as I can see."

     "It may certainly prove to be the end of a queer tale," said Holmes.
     "You have noticed the number on the top of the page. It is two
     hundred and forty-five. Where are the odd two hundred and forty-four
     pages?"

     "Well, I suppose the burglars got those. Much good may it do them!"

     "It seems a queer thing to break into a house in order to steal such
     papers as that. Does it suggest anything to you, Inspector?"

     "Yes, sir, it suggests that in their hurry the rascals just grabbed
     at what came first to hand. I wish them joy of what they got."

     "Why should they go to my son's things?" asked Mrs. Maberley.

     "Well, they found nothing valuable downstairs, so they tried their
     luck upstairs. That is how I read it. What do you make of it, Mr.
     Holmes?"

     "I must think it over, Inspector. Come to the window, Watson." Then,
     as we stood together, he read over the fragment of paper. It began in
     the middle of a sentence and ran like this:

     "... face bled considerably from the cuts and blows, but it was
     nothing to the bleeding of his heart as he saw that lovely face, the
     face for which he had been prepared to sacrifice his very life,
     looking out at his agony and humiliation. She smiled--yes, by Heaven!
     she smiled, like the heartless fiend she was, as he looked up at her.
     It was at that moment that love died and hate was born. Man must live
     for something. If it is not for your embrace, my lady, then it shall
     surely be for your undoing and my complete revenge."

     "Queer grammar!" said Holmes with a smile as he handed the paper back
     to the inspector. "Did you notice how the 'he' suddenly changed to
     'my'? The writer was so carried away by his own story that he
     imagined himself at the supreme moment to be the hero."

     "It seemed mighty poor stuff," said the inspector as he replaced it
     in his book. "What! are you off, Mr. Holmes?"

     "I don't think there is anything more for me to do now that the case
     is in such capable hands. By the way, Mrs. Maberley, did you say you
     wished to travel?"

     "It has always been my dream, Mr. Holmes."

     "Where would you like to go--Cairo, Madeira, the Riviera?"

     "Oh, if I had the money I would go round the world."

     "Quite so. Round the world. Well, good-morning. I may drop you a line
     in the evening." As we passed the window I caught a glimpse of the
     inspector's smile and shake of the head. "These clever fellows have
     always a touch of madness." That was what I read in the inspector's
     smile.

     "Now, Watson, we are at the last lap of our little journey," said
     Holmes when we were back in the roar of central London once more. "I
     think we had best clear the matter up at once, and it would be well
     that you should come with me, for it is safer to have a witness when
     you are dealing with such a lady as Isadora Klein."

     We had taken a cab and were speeding to some address in Grosvenor
     Square. Holmes had been sunk in thought, but he roused himself
     suddenly.

     "By the way, Watson, I suppose you see it all clearly?"

     "No, I can't say that I do. I only gather that we are going to see
     the lady who is behind all this mischief."

     "Exactly! But does the name Isadora Klein convey nothing to you? She
     was, of course, the celebrated beauty. There was never a woman to
     touch her. She is pure Spanish, the real blood of the masterful
     Conquistadors, and her people have been leaders in Pernambuco for
     generations. She married the aged German sugar king, Klein, and
     presently found herself the richest as well as the most lovely widow
     upon earth. Then there was an interval of adventure when she pleased
     her own tastes. She had several lovers, and Douglas Maberley, one of
     the most striking men in London, was one of them. It was by all
     accounts more than an adventure with him. He was not a society
     butterfly but a strong, proud man who gave and expected all. But she
     is the 'belle dame sans merci' of fiction. When her caprice is
     satisfied the matter is ended, and if the other party in the matter
     can't take her word for it she knows how to bring it home to him."

     "Then that was his own story--"

     "Ah! you are piecing it together now. I hear that she is about to
     marry the young Duke of Lomond, who might almost be her son. His
     Grace's ma might overlook the age, but a big scandal would be a
     different matter, so it is imperative-- Ah! here we are."

     It was one of the finest corner-houses of the West End. A
     machine-like footman took up our cards and returned with word that
     the lady was not at home. "Then we shall wait until she is," said
     Holmes cheerfully.

     The machine broke down.

     "Not at home means not at home to you," said the footman.

     "Good," Holmes answered. "That means that we shall not have to wait.
     Kindly give this note to your mistress."

     He scribbled three or four words upon a sheet of his notebook, folded
     it, and handed it to the man.

     "What did you say, Holmes?" I asked.

     "I simply wrote: 'Shall it be the police, then?' I think that should
     pass us in."

     It did--with amazing celerity. A minute later we were in an Arabian
     Nights drawing-room, vast and wonderful, in a half gloom, picked out
     with an occasional pink electric light. The lady had come, I felt, to
     that time of life when even the proudest beauty finds the half light
     more welcome. She rose from a settee as we entered: tall, queenly, a
     perfect figure, a lovely mask-like face, with two wonderful Spanish
     eyes which looked murder at us both.

     "What is this intrusion--and this insulting message?" she asked,
     holding up the slip of paper.

     "I need not explain, madame. I have too much respect for your
     intelligence to do so--though I confess that intelligence has been
     surprisingly at fault of late."

     "How so, sir?"

     "By supposing that your hired bullies could frighten me from my work.
     Surely no man would take up my profession if it were not that danger
     attracts him. It was you, then, who forced me to examine the case of
     young Maberley."

     "I have no idea what you are talking about. What have I to do with
     hired bullies?"

     Holmes turned away wearily.

     "Yes, I have underrated your intelligence. Well, good-afternoon!"

     "Stop! Where are you going?"

     "To Scotland Yard."

     We had not got halfway to the door before she had overtaken us and
     was holding his arm. She had turned in a moment from steel to velvet.

     "Come and sit down, gentlemen. Let us talk this matter over. I feel
     that I may be frank with you, Mr. Holmes. You have the feelings of a
     gentleman. How quick a woman's instinct is to find it out. I will
     treat you as a friend."

     "I cannot promise to reciprocate, madame. I am not the law, but I
     represent justice so far as my feeble powers go. I am ready to
     listen, and then I will tell you how I will act."

     "No doubt it was foolish of me to threaten a brave man like
     yourself."

     "What was really foolish, madame, is that you have placed yourself in
     the power of a band of rascals who may blackmail or give you away."

     "No, no! I am not so simple. Since I have promised to be frank, I may
     say that no one, save Barney Stockdale and Susan, his wife, have the
     least idea who their employer is. As to them, well, it is not the
     first--" She smiled and nodded with a charming coquettish intimacy.

     "I see. You've tested them before."

     "They are good hounds who run silent."

     "Such hounds have a way sooner or later of biting the hand that feeds
     them. They will be arrested for this burglary. The police are already
     after them."

     "They will take what comes to them. That is what they are paid for. I
     shall not appear in the matter."

     "Unless I bring you into it."

     "No, no, you would not. You are a gentleman. It is a woman's secret."

     "In the first place, you must give back this manuscript."

     She broke into a ripple of laughter and walked to the fireplace.
     There was a calcined mass which she broke up with the poker. "Shall I
     give this back?" she asked. So roguish and exquisite did she look as
     she stood before us with a challenging smile that I felt of all
     Holmes's criminals this was the one whom he would find it hardest to
     face. However, he was immune from sentiment.

     "That seals your fate," he said coldly. "You are very prompt in your
     actions, madame, but you have overdone it on this occasion."

     She threw the poker down with a clatter.

     "How hard you are!" she cried. "May I tell you the whole story?"

     "I fancy I could tell it to you."

     "But you must look at it with my eyes, Mr. Holmes. You must realize
     it from the point of view of a woman who sees all her life's ambition
     about to be ruined at the last moment. Is such a woman to be blamed
     if she protects herself?"

     "The original sin was yours."

     "Yes, yes! I admit it. He was a dear boy, Douglas, but it so chanced
     that he could not fit into my plans. He wanted marriage--marriage,
     Mr. Holmes--with a penniless commoner. Nothing less would serve him.
     Then he became pertinacious. Because I had given he seemed to think
     that I still must give, and to him only. It was intolerable. At last
     I had to make him realize it."

     "By hiring ruffians to beat him under your own window."

     "You do indeed seem to know everything. Well, it is true. Barney and
     the boys drove him away, and were, I admit, a little rough in doing
     so. But what did he do then? Could I have believed that a gentleman
     would do such an act? He wrote a book in which he described his own
     story. I, of course, was the wolf; he the lamb. It was all there,
     under different names, of course; but who in all London would have
     failed to recognize it? What do you say to that, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Well, he was within his rights."

     "It was as if the air of Italy had got into his blood and brought
     with it the old cruel Italian spirit. He wrote to me and sent me a
     copy of his book that I might have the torture of anticipation. There
     were two copies, he said--one for me, one for his publisher."

     "How did you know the publisher's had not reached him?"

     "I knew who his publisher was. It is not his only novel, you know. I
     found out that he had not heard from Italy. Then came Douglas's
     sudden death. So long as that other manuscript was in the world there
     was no safety for me. Of course, it must be among his effects, and
     these would be returned to his mother. I set the gang at work. One of
     them got into the house as servant. I wanted to do the thing
     honestly. I really and truly did. I was ready to buy the house and
     everything in it. I offered any price she cared to ask. I only tried
     the other way when everything else had failed. Now, Mr. Holmes,
     granting that I was too hard on Douglas--and, God knows, I am sorry
     for it!--what else could I do with my whole future at stake?"

     Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

     "Well, well," said he, "I suppose I shall have to compound a felony
     as usual. How much does it cost to go round the world in first-class
     style?"

     The lady stared in amazement.

     "Could it be done on five thousand pounds?"

     "Well, I should think so, indeed!"

     "Very good. I think you will sign me a check for that, and I will see
     that it comes to Mrs. Maberley. You owe her a little change of air.
     Meantime, lady"--he wagged a cautionary forefinger--"have a care!
     Have a care! You can't play with edged tools forever without cutting
     those dainty hands."



     It may have been a comedy, or it may have been a tragedy. It cost one
     man his reason, it cost me a blood-letting, and it cost yet another
     man the penalties of the law. Yet there was certainly an element of
     comedy. Well, you shall judge for yourselves.

     I remember the date very well, for it was in the same month that
     Holmes refused a knighthood for services which may perhaps some day
     be described. I only refer to the matter in passing, for in my
     position of partner and confidant I am obliged to be particularly
     careful to avoid any indiscretion. I repeat, however, that this
     enables me to fix the date, which was the latter end of June, 1902,
     shortly after the conclusion of the South African War. Holmes had
     spent several days in bed, as was his habit from time to time, but he
     emerged that morning with a long foolscap document in his hand and a
     twinkle of amusement in his austere gray eyes.

     "There is a chance for you to make some money, friend Watson," said
     he. "Have you ever heard the name of Garrideb?"

     I admitted that I had not.

     "Well, if you can lay your hand upon a Garrideb, there's money in
     it."

     "Why?"

     "Ah, that's a long story--rather a whimsical one, too. I don't think
     in all our explorations of human complexities we have ever come upon
     anything more singular. The fellow will be here presently for
     cross-examination, so I won't open the matter up till he comes. But,
     meanwhile, that's the name we want."

     The telephone directory lay on the table beside me, and I turned over
     the pages in a rather hopeless quest. But to my amazement there was
     this strange name in its due place. I gave a cry of triumph.

     "Here you are, Holmes! Here it is!"

     Holmes took the book from my hand.

     "'Garrideb, N.,' " he read, "'136 Little Ryder Street, W.' Sorry to
     disappoint you, my dear Watson, but this is the man himself. That is
     the address upon his letter. We want another to match him."

     Mrs. Hudson had come in with a card upon a tray. I took it up and
     glanced at it.

     "Why, here it is!" I cried in amazement. "This is a different
     initial. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law, Moorville, Kansas, U. S.
     A."

     Holmes smiled as he looked at the card. "I am afraid you must make
     yet another effort, Watson," said he. "This gentleman is also in the
     plot already, though I certainly did not expect to see him this
     morning. However, he is in a position to tell us a good deal which I
     want to know."

     A moment later he was in the room. Mr. John Garrideb, Counsellor at
     Law, was a short, powerful man with the round, fresh, clean-shaven
     face characteristic of so many American men of affairs. The general
     effect was chubby and rather childlike, so that one received the
     impression of quite a young man with a broad set smile upon his face.
     His eyes, however, were arresting. Seldom in any human head have I
     seen a pair which bespoke a more intense inward life, so bright were
     they, so alert, so responsive to every change of thought. His accent
     was American, but was not accompanied by any eccentricity of speech.

     "Mr. Holmes?" he asked, glancing from one to the other. "Ah, yes!
     Your pictures are not unlike you, sir, if I may say so. I believe you
     have had a letter from my namesake, Mr. Nathan Garrideb, have you
     not?"

     "Pray sit down," said Sherlock Holmes. "We shall, I fancy, have a
     good deal to discuss." He took up his sheets of foolscap. "You are,
     of course, the Mr. John Garrideb mentioned in this document. But
     surely you have been in England some time?"

     "Why do you say that, Mr. Holmes?" I seemed to read sudden suspicion
     in those expressive eyes.

     "Your whole outfit is English."

     Mr. Garrideb forced a laugh. "I've read of your tricks, Mr. Holmes,
     but I never thought I would be the subject of them. Where do you read
     that?"

     "The shoulder cut of your coat, the toes of your boots--could anyone
     doubt it?"

     "Well, well, I had no idea I was so obvious a Britisher. But business
     brought me over here some time ago, and so, as you say, my outfit is
     nearly all London. However, I guess your time is of value, and we did
     not meet to talk about the cut of my socks. What about getting down
     to that paper you hold in your hand?"

     Holmes had in some way ruffled our visitor, whose chubby face had
     assumed a far less amiable expression.

     "Patience! Patience, Mr. Garrideb!" said my friend in a soothing
     voice. "Dr. Watson would tell you that these little digressions of
     mine sometimes prove in the end to have some bearing on the matter.
     But why did Mr. Nathan Garrideb not come with you?"

     "Why did he ever drag you into it at all?" asked our visitor with a
     sudden outflame of anger. "What in thunder had you to do with it?
     Here was a bit of professional business between two gentlemen, and
     one of them must needs call in a detective! I saw him this morning,
     and he told me this fool-trick he had played me, and that's why I am
     here. But I feel bad about it, all the same."

     "There was no reflection upon you, Mr. Garrideb. It was simply zeal
     upon his part to gain your end--an end which is, I understand,
     equally vital for both of you. He knew that I had means of getting
     information, and, therefore, it was very natural that he should apply
     to me."

     Our visitor's angry face gradually cleared.

     "Well, that puts it different," said he. "When I went to see him this
     morning and he told me he had sent to a detective, I just asked for
     your address and came right away. I don't want police butting into a
     private matter. But if you are content just to help us find the man,
     there can be no harm in that."

     "Well, that is just how it stands," said Holmes. "And now, sir, since
     you are here, we had best have a clear account from your own lips. My
     friend here knows nothing of the details."

     Mr. Garrideb surveyed me with not too friendly a gaze.

     "Need he know?" he asked.

     "We usually work together."

     "Well, there's no reason it should be kept a secret. I'll give you
     the facts as short as I can make them. If you came from Kansas I
     would not need to explain to you who Alexander Hamilton Garrideb was.
     He made his money in real estate, and afterwards in the wheat pit at
     Chicago, but he spent it in buying up as much land as would make one
     of your counties, lying along the Arkansas River, west of Fort Dodge.
     It's grazing-land and lumber-land and arable-land and
     mineralized-land, and just every sort of land that brings dollars to
     the man that owns it.

     "He had no kith nor kin--or, if he had, I never heard of it. But he
     took a kind of pride in the queerness of his name. That was what
     brought us together. I was in the law at Topeka, and one day I had a
     visit from the old man, and he was tickled to death to meet another
     man with his own name. It was his pet fad, and he was dead set to
     find out if there were any more Garridebs in the world. 'Find me
     another!' said he. I told him I was a busy man and could not spend my
     life hiking round the world in search of Garridebs. 'None the less,'
     said he, 'that is just what you will do if things pan out as I
     planned them.' I thought he was joking, but there was a powerful lot
     of meaning in the words, as I was soon to discover.

     "For he died within a year of saying them, and he left a will behind
     him. It was the queerest will that has ever been filed in the State
     of Kansas. His property was divided into three parts, and I was to
     have one on condition that I found two Garridebs who would share the
     remainder. It's five million dollars for each if it is a cent, but we
     can't lay a finger on it until we all three stand in a row.

     "It was so big a chance that I just let my legal practice slide and I
     set forth looking for Garridebs. There is not one in the United
     States. I went through it, sir, with a fine-toothed comb and never a
     Garrideb could I catch. Then I tried the old country. Sure enough
     there was the name in the London telephone directory. I went after
     him two days ago and explained the whole matter to him. But he is a
     lone man, like myself, with some women relations, but no men. It says
     three adult men in the will. So you see we still have a vacancy, and
     if you can help to fill it we will be very ready to pay your
     charges."

     "Well, Watson," said Holmes with a smile, "I said it was rather
     whimsical, did I not? I should have thought, sir, that your obvious
     way was to advertise in the agony columns of the papers."

     "I have done that, Mr. Holmes. No replies."

     "Dear me! Well, it is certainly a most curious little problem. I may
     take a glance at it in my leisure. By the way, it is curious that you
     should have come from Topeka. I used to have a correspondent--he is
     dead now--old Dr. Lysander Starr, who was mayor in 1890."

     "Good old Dr. Starr!" said our visitor. "His name is still honoured.
     Well, Mr. Holmes, I suppose all we can do is to report to you and let
     you know how we progress. I reckon you will hear within a day or
     two." With this assurance our American bowed and departed.

     Holmes had lit his pipe, and he sat for some time with a curious
     smile upon his face.

     "Well?" I asked at last.

     "I am wondering, Watson--just wondering!"

     "At what?"

     Holmes took his pipe from his lips.

     "I was wondering, Watson, what on earth could be the object of this
     man in telling us such a rigmarole of lies. I nearly asked him
     so--for there are times when a brutal frontal attack is the best
     policy--but I judged it better to let him think he had fooled us.
     Here is a man with an English coat frayed at the elbow and trousers
     bagged at the knee with a year's wear, and yet by this document and
     by his own account he is a provincial American lately landed in
     London. There have been no advertisements in the agony columns. You
     know that I miss nothing there. They are my favourite covert for
     putting up a bird, and I would never have overlooked such a cock
     pheasant as that. I never knew a Dr. Lysander Starr, of Topeka. Touch
     him where you would he was false. I think the fellow is really an
     American, but he has worn his accent smooth with years of London.
     What is his game, then, and what motive lies behind this preposterous
     search for Garridebs? It's worth our attention, for, granting that
     the man is a rascal, he is certainly a complex and ingenious one. We
     must now find out if our other correspondent is a fraud also. Just
     ring him up, Watson."

     I did so, and heard a thin, quavering voice at the other end of the
     line.

     "Yes, yes, I am Mr. Nathan Garrideb. Is Mr. Holmes there? I should
     very much like to have a word with Mr. Holmes."

     My friend took the instrument and I heard the usual syncopated
     dialogue.

     "Yes, he has been here. I understand that you don't know him. ... How
     long? ... Only two days! ... Yes, yes, of course, it is a most
     captivating prospect. Will you be at home this evening? I suppose
     your namesake will not be there? ... Very good, we will come then,
     for I would rather have a chat without him. ... Dr. Watson will come
     with me. ... I understand from your note that you did not go out
     often. ... Well, we shall be round about six. You need not mention it
     to the American lawyer. ... Very good. Good-bye!"

     It was twilight of a lovely spring evening, and even Little Ryder
     Street, one of the smaller offshoots from the Edgware Road, within a
     stone-cast of old Tyburn Tree of evil memory, looked golden and
     wonderful in the slanting rays of the setting sun. The particular
     house to which we were directed was a large, old-fashioned, Early
     Georgian edifice, with a flat brick face broken only by two deep bay
     windows on the ground floor. It was on this ground floor that our
     client lived, and, indeed, the low windows proved to be the front of
     the huge room in which he spent his waking hours. Holmes pointed as
     we passed to the small brass plate which bore the curious name.

     "Up some years, Watson," he remarked, indicating its discoloured
     surface. "It's his real name, anyhow, and that is something to note."

     The house had a common stair, and there were a number of names
     painted in the hall, some indicating offices and some private
     chambers. It was not a collection of residential flats, but rather
     the abode of Bohemian bachelors. Our client opened the door for us
     himself and apologized by saying that the woman in charge left at
     four o'clock. Mr. Nathan Garrideb proved to be a very tall,
     loose-jointed, round-backed person, gaunt and bald, some sixty-odd
     years of age. He had a cadaverous face, with the dull dead skin of a
     man to whom exercise was unknown. Large round spectacles and a small
     projecting goat's beard combined with his stooping attitude to give
     him an expression of peering curiosity. The general effect, however,
     was amiable, though eccentric.

     The room was as curious as its occupant. It looked like a small
     museum. It was both broad and deep, with cupboards and cabinets all
     round, crowded with specimens, geological and anatomical. Cases of
     butterflies and moths flanked each side of the entrance. A large
     table in the centre was littered with all sorts of debris, while the
     tall brass tube of a powerful microscope bristled up among them. As I
     glanced round I was surprised at the universality of the man's
     interests. Here was a case of ancient coins. There was a cabinet of
     flint instruments. Behind his central table was a large cupboard of
     fossil bones. Above was a line of plaster skulls with such names as
     "Neanderthal," "Heidelberg," "Cro-Magnon" printed beneath them. It
     was clear that he was a student of many subjects. As he stood in
     front of us now, he held a piece of chamois leather in his right hand
     with which he was polishing a coin.

     "Syracusan--of the best period," he explained, holding it up. "They
     degenerated greatly towards the end. At their best I hold them
     supreme, though some prefer the Alexandrian school. You will find a
     chair here, Mr. Holmes. Pray allow me to clear these bones. And you,
     sir--ah, yes, Dr. Watson--if you would have the goodness to put the
     Japanese vase to one side. You see round me my little interests in
     life. My doctor lectures me about never going out, but why should I
     go out when I have so much to hold me here? I can assure you that the
     adequate cataloguing of one of those cabinets would take me three
     good months."

     Holmes looked round him with curiosity.

     "But do you tell me that you never go out?" he said.

     "Now and again I drive down to Sotheby's or Christie's. Otherwise I
     very seldom leave my room. I am not too strong, and my researches are
     very absorbing. But you can imagine, Mr. Holmes, what a terrific
     shock--pleasant but terrific--it was for me when I heard of this
     unparalleled good fortune. It only needs one more Garrideb to
     complete the matter, and surely we can find one. I had a brother, but
     he is dead, and female relatives are disqualified. But there must
     surely be others in the world. I had heard that you handled strange
     cases, and that was why I sent to you. Of course, this American
     gentleman is quite right, and I should have taken his advice first,
     but I acted for the best."

     "I think you acted very wisely indeed," said Holmes. "But are you
     really anxious to acquire an estate in America?"

     "Certainly not, sir. Nothing would induce me to leave my collection.
     But this gentleman has assured me that he will buy me out as soon as
     we have established our claim. Five million dollars was the sum
     named. There are a dozen specimens in the market at the present
     moment which fill gaps in my collection, and which I am unable to
     purchase for want of a few hundred pounds. Just think what I could do
     with five million dollars. Why, I have the nucleus of a national
     collection. I shall be the Hans Sloane of my age."

     His eyes gleamed behind his great spectacles. It was very clear that
     no pains would be spared by Mr. Nathan Garrideb in finding a
     namesake.

     "I merely called to make your acquaintance, and there is no reason
     why I should interrupt your studies," said Holmes. "I prefer to
     establish personal touch with those with whom I do business. There
     are few questions I need ask, for I have your very clear narrative in
     my pocket, and I filled up the blanks when this American gentleman
     called. I understand that up to this week you were unaware of his
     existence."

     "That is so. He called last Tuesday."

     "Did he tell you of our interview to-day?"

     "Yes, he came straight back to me. He had been very angry."

     "Why should he be angry?"

     "He seemed to think it was some reflection on his honour. But he was
     quite cheerful again when he returned."

     "Did he suggest any course of action?"

     "No, sir, he did not."

     "Has he had, or asked for, any money from you?"

     "No, sir, never!"

     "You see no possible object he has in view?"

     "None, except what he states."

     "Did you tell him of our telephone appointment?"

     "Yes, sir, I did."

     Holmes was lost in thought. I could see that he was puzzled.

     "Have you any articles of great value in your collection?"

     "No, sir. I am not a rich man. It is a good collection, but not a
     very valuable one."

     "You have no fear of burglars?"

     "Not the least."

     "How long have you been in these rooms?"

     "Nearly five years."

     Holmes's cross-examination was interrupted by an imperative knocking
     at the door. No sooner had our client unlatched it than the American
     lawyer burst excitedly into the room.

     "Here you are!" he cried, waving a paper over his head. "I thought I
     should be in time to get you. Mr. Nathan Garrideb, my
     congratulations! You are a rich man, sir. Our business is happily
     finished and all is well. As to you, Mr. Holmes, we can only say we
     are sorry if we have given you any useless trouble."

     He handed over the paper to our client, who stood staring at a marked
     advertisement. Holmes and I leaned forward and read it over his
     shoulder. This is how it ran:

                                 Howard Garrideb
                      Constructor of Agricultural Machinery
        Binders, reapers, steam and hand plows, drills, harrows, farmers'
                  carts, buckboards, and all other appliances.
                          Estimates for Artesian Wells
                        Apply Grosvenor Buildings, Aston

     "Glorious!" gasped our host. "That makes our third man."

     "I had opened up inquiries in Birmingham," said the American, "and my
     agent there has sent me this advertisement from a local paper. We
     must hustle and put the thing through. I have written to this man and
     told him that you will see him in his office to-morrow afternoon at
     four o'clock."

     "You want me to see him?"

     "What do you say, Mr. Holmes? Don't you think it would be wiser? Here
     am I, a wandering American with a wonderful tale. Why should he
     believe what I tell him? But you are a Britisher with solid
     references, and he is bound to take notice of what you say. I would
     go with you if you wished, but I have a very busy day to-morrow, and
     I could always follow you if you are in any trouble."

     "Well, I have not made such a journey for years."

     "It is nothing, Mr. Garrideb. I have figured out our connections. You
     leave at twelve and should be there soon after two. Then you can be
     back the same night. All you have to do is to see this man, explain
     the matter, and get an affidavit of his existence. By the Lord!" he
     added hotly, "considering I've come all the way from the centre of
     America, it is surely little enough if you go a hundred miles in
     order to put this matter through."

     "Quite so," said Holmes. "I think what this gentleman says is very
     true."

     Mr. Nathan Garrideb shrugged his shoulders with a disconsolate air.
     "Well, if you insist I shall go," said he. "It is certainly hard for
     me to refuse you anything, considering the glory of hope that you
     have brought into my life."

     "Then that is agreed," said Holmes, "and no doubt you will let me
     have a report as soon as you can."

     "I'll see to that," said the American. "Well," he added, looking at
     his watch, "I'll have to get on. I'll call to-morrow, Mr. Nathan, and
     see you off to Birmingham. Coming my way, Mr. Holmes? Well, then,
     good-bye, and we may have good news for you to-morrow night."

     I noticed that my friend's face cleared when the American left the
     room, and the look of thoughtful perplexity had vanished.

     "I wish I could look over your collection, Mr. Garrideb," said he.
     "In my profession all sorts of odd knowledge comes useful, and this
     room of yours is a storehouse of it."

     Our client shone with pleasure and his eyes gleamed from behind his
     big glasses.

     "I had always heard, sir, that you were a very intelligent man," said
     he. "I could take you round now if you have the time."

     "Unfortunately, I have not. But these specimens are so well labelled
     and classified that they hardly need your personal explanation. If I
     should be able to look in to-morrow, I presume that there would be no
     objection to my glancing over them?"

     "None at all. You are most welcome. The place will, of course, be
     shut up, but Mrs. Saunders is in the basement up to four o'clock and
     would let you in with her key."

     Well, I happen to be clear to-morrow afternoon. If you would say a
     word to Mrs. Saunders it would be quite in order. By the way, who is
     your house-agent?"

     Our client was amazed at the sudden question.

     "Holloway and Steele, in the Edgware Road. But why?"

     "I am a bit of an archaeologist myself when it comes to houses," said
     Holmes, laughing. "I was wondering if this was Queen Anne or
     Georgian."

     "Georgian, beyond doubt."

     "Really. I should have thought a little earlier. However, it is
     easily ascertained. Well, good-bye, Mr. Garrideb, and may you have
     every success in your Birmingham journey."

     The house-agent's was close by, but we found that it was closed for
     the day, so we made our way back to Baker Street. It was not till
     after dinner that Holmes reverted to the subject.

     "Our little problem draws to a close," said he. "No doubt you have
     outlined the solution in your own mind."

     "I can make neither head nor tail of it."

     "The head is surely clear enough and the tail we should see
     to-morrow. Did you notice nothing curious about that advertisement?"

     "I saw that the word 'plough' was misspelt."

     "Oh, you did notice that, did you? Come, Watson, you improve all the
     time. Yes, it was bad English but good American. The printer had set
     it up as received. Then the buckboards. That is American also. And
     artesian wells are commoner with them than with us. It was a typical
     American advertisement, but purporting to be from an English firm.
     What do you make of that?"

     "I can only suppose that this American lawyer put it in himself. What
     his object was I fail to understand."

     "Well, there are alternative explanations. Anyhow, he wanted to get
     this good old fossil up to Birmingham. That is very clear. I might
     have told him that he was clearly going on a wild-goose chase, but,
     on second thoughts, it seemed better to clear the stage by letting
     him go. To-morrow, Watson--well, to-morrow will speak for itself."

     Holmes was up and out early. When he returned at lunchtime I noticed
     that his face was very grave.

     "This is a more serious matter than I had expected, Watson," said he.
     "It is fair to tell you so, though I know it will only be an
     additional reason to you for running your head into danger. I should
     know my Watson by now. But there is danger, and you should know it."

     "Well, it is not the first we have shared, Holmes. I hope it may not
     be the last. What is the particular danger this time?"

     "We are up against a very hard case. I have identified Mr. John
     Garrideb, Counsellor at Law. He is none other than 'Killer' Evans, of
     sinister and murderous reputation."

     "I fear I am none the wiser."

     "Ah, it is not part of your profession to carry about a portable
     Newgate Calendar in your memory. I have been down to see friend
     Lestrade at the Yard. There may be an occasional want of imaginative
     intuition down there, but they lead the world for thoroughness and
     method. I had an idea that we might get on the track of our American
     friend in their records. Sure enough, I found his chubby face smiling
     up at me from the rogues' portrait gallery. 'James Winter, alias
     Morecroft, alias Killer Evans,' was the inscription below." Holmes
     drew an envelope from his pocket. "I scribbled down a few points from
     his dossier: Aged forty-four. Native of Chicago. Known to have shot
     three men in the States. Escaped from penitentiary through political
     influence. Came to London in 1893. Shot a man over cards in a
     night-club in the Waterloo Road in January, 1895. Man died, but he
     was shown to have been the aggressor in the row. Dead man was
     identified as Rodger Prescott, famous as forger and coiner in
     Chicago. Killer Evans released in 1901. Has been under police
     supervision since, but so far as known has led an honest life. Very
     dangerous man, usually carries arms and is prepared to use them. That
     is our bird, Watson--a sporting bird, as you must admit."

     "But what is his game?"

     "Well, it begins to define itself. I have been to the house-agent's.
     Our client, as he told us, has been there five years. It was unlet
     for a year before then. The previous tenant was a gentleman at large
     named Waldron. Waldron's appearance was well remembered at the
     office. He had suddenly vanished and nothing more been heard of him.
     He was a tall, bearded man with very dark features. Now, Prescott,
     the man whom Killer Evans had shot, was, according to Scotland Yard,
     a tall, dark man with a beard. As a working hypothesis, I think we
     may take it that Prescott, the American criminal, used to live in the
     very room which our innocent friend now devotes to his museum. So at
     last we get a link, you see."

     "And the next link?"

     "Well, we must go now and look for that."

     He took a revolver from the drawer and handed it to me.

     "I have my old favourite with me. If our Wild West friend tries to
     live up to his nickname, we must be ready for him. I'll give you an
     hour for a siesta, Watson, and then I think it will be time for our
     Ryder Street adventure."

     It was just four o'clock when we reached the curious apartment of
     Nathan Garrideb. Mrs. Saunders, the caretaker, was about to leave,
     but she had no hesitation in admitting us, for the door shut with a
     spring lock, and Holmes promised to see that all was safe before we
     left. Shortly afterwards the outer door closed, her bonnet passed the
     bow window, and we knew that we were alone in the lower floor of the
     house. Holmes made a rapid examination of the premises. There was one
     cupboard in a dark corner which stood out a little from the wall. It
     was behind this that we eventually crouched while Holmes in a whisper
     outlined his intentions.

     "He wanted to get our amiable friend out of his room--that is very
     clear, and, as the collector never went out, it took some planning to
     do it. The whole of this Garrideb invention was apparently for no
     other end. I must say, Watson, that there is a certain devilish
     ingenuity about it, even if the queer name of the tenant did give him
     an opening which he could hardly have expected. He wove his plot with
     remarkable cunning."

     "But what did he want?"

     "Well, that is what we are here to find out. It has nothing whatever
     to do with our client, so far as I can read the situation. It is
     something connected with the man he murdered--the man who may have
     been his confederate in crime. There is some guilty secret in the
     room. That is how I read it. At first I thought our friend might have
     something in his collection more valuable than he knew--something
     worth the attention of a big criminal. But the fact that Rodger
     Prescott of evil memory inhabited these rooms points to some deeper
     reason. Well, Watson, we can but possess our souls in patience and
     see what the hour may bring."

     That hour was not long in striking. We crouched closer in the shadow
     as we heard the outer door open and shut. Then came the sharp,
     metallic snap of a key, and the American was in the room. He closed
     the door softly behind him, took a sharp glance around him to see
     that all was safe, threw off his overcoat, and walked up to the
     central table with the brisk manner of one who knows exactly what he
     has to do and how to do it. He pushed the table to one side, tore up
     the square of carpet on which it rested, rolled it completely back,
     and then, drawing a jemmy from his inside pocket, he knelt down and
     worked vigorously upon the floor. Presently we heard the sound of
     sliding boards, and an instant later a square had opened in the
     planks. Killer Evans struck a match, lit a stump of candle, and
     vanished from our view.

     Clearly our moment had come. Holmes touched my wrist as a signal, and
     together we stole across to the open trap-door. Gently as we moved,
     however, the old floor must have creaked under our feet, for the head
     of our American, peering anxiously round, emerged suddenly from the
     open space. His face turned upon us with a glare of baffled rage,
     which gradually softened into a rather shamefaced grin as he realized
     that two pistols were pointed at his head.

     "Well, well!" said he coolly as he scrambled to the surface. "I guess
     you have been one too many for me, Mr. Holmes. Saw through my game, I
     suppose, and played me for a sucker from the first. Well, sir, I hand
     it to you; you have me beat and--"

     In an instant he had whisked out a revolver from his breast and had
     fired two shots. I felt a sudden hot sear as if a red-hot iron had
     been pressed to my thigh. There was a crash as Holmes's pistol came
     down on the man's head. I had a vision of him sprawling upon the
     floor with blood running down his face while Holmes rummaged him for
     weapons. Then my friend's wiry arms were round me, and he was leading
     me to a chair.

     "You're not hurt, Watson? For God's sake, say that you are not hurt!"

     It was worth a wound--it was worth many wounds--to know the depth of
     loyalty and love which lay behind that cold mask. The clear, hard
     eyes were dimmed for a moment, and the firm lips were shaking. For
     the one and only time I caught a glimpse of a great heart as well as
     of a great brain. All my years of humble but single-minded service
     culminated in that moment of revelation.

     "It's nothing, Holmes. It's a mere scratch."

     He had ripped up my trousers with his pocket-knife.

     "You are right," he cried with an immense sigh of relief. "It is
     quite superficial." His face set like flint as he glared at our
     prisoner, who was sitting up with a dazed face. "By the Lord, it is
     as well for you. If you had killed Watson, you would not have got out
     of this room alive. Now, sir, what have you to say for yourself?"

     He had nothing to say for himself. He only sat and scowled. I leaned
     on Holmes's arm, and together we looked down into the small cellar
     which had been disclosed by the secret flap. It was still illuminated
     by the candle which Evans had taken down with him. Our eyes fell upon
     a mass of rusted machinery, great rolls of paper, a litter of
     bottles, and, neatly arranged upon a small table, a number of neat
     little bundles.

     "A printing press--a counterfeiter's outfit," said Holmes.

     "Yes, sir," said our prisoner, staggering slowly to his feet and then
     sinking into the chair. "The greatest counterfeiter London ever saw.
     That's Prescott's machine, and those bundles on the table are two
     thousand of Prescott's notes worth a hundred each and fit to pass
     anywhere. Help yourselves, gentlemen. Call it a deal and let me beat
     it."

     Holmes laughed.

     "We don't do things like that, Mr. Evans. There is no bolt-hole for
     you in this country. You shot this man Prescott, did you not?"

     "Yes, sir, and got five years for it, though it was he who pulled on
     me. Five years--when I should have had a medal the size of a soup
     plate. No living man could tell a Prescott from a Bank of England,
     and if I hadn't put him out he would have flooded London with them. I
     was the only one in the world who knew where he made them. Can you
     wonder that I wanted to get to the place? And can you wonder that
     when I found this crazy boob of a bug-hunter with the queer name
     squatting right on the top of it, and never quitting his room, I had
     to do the best I could to shift him? Maybe I would have been wiser if
     I had put him away. It would have been easy enough, but I'm a
     soft-hearted guy that can't begin shooting unless the other man has a
     gun also. But say, Mr. Holmes, what have I done wrong, anyhow? I've
     not used this plant. I've not hurt this old stiff. Where do you get
     me?"

     "Only attempted murder, so far as I can see," said Holmes. "But
     that's not our job. They take that at the next stage. What we wanted
     at present was just your sweet self. Please give the Yard a call,
     Watson. It won't be entirely unexpected."

     So those were the facts about Killer Evans and his remarkable
     invention of the three Garridebs. We heard later that our poor old
     friend never got over the shock of his dissipated dreams. When his
     castle in the air fell down, it buried him beneath the ruins. He was
     last heard of at a nursing-home in Brixton. It was a glad day at the
     Yard when the Prescott outfit was discovered, for, though they knew
     that it existed, they had never been able, after the death of the
     man, to find out where it was. Evans had indeed done great service
     and caused several worthy C. I. D. men to sleep the sounder, for the
     counterfeiter stands in a class by himself as a public danger. They
     would willingly have subscribed to that soup-plate medal of which the
     criminal had spoken, but an unappreciative bench took a less
     favourable view, and the Killer returned to those shades from which
     he had just emerged.

It was in the year '95 that a combination of events, into which I
     need not enter, caused Mr. Sherlock Holmes and myself to spend some
     weeks in one of our great University towns, and it was during this
     time that the small but instructive adventure which I am about to
     relate befell us. It will be obvious that any details which would
     help the reader to exactly identify the college or the criminal would
     be injudicious and offensive. So painful a scandal may well be
     allowed to die out. With due discretion the incident itself may,
     however, be described, since it serves to illustrate some of those
     qualities for which my friend was remarkable. I will endeavour in my
     statement to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events to
     any particular place, or give a clue as to the people concerned.

     We were residing at the time in furnished lodgings close to a library
     where Sherlock Holmes was pursuing some laborious researches in early
     English charters--researches which led to results so striking that
     they may be the subject of one of my future narratives. Here it was
     that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. Hilton
     Soames, tutor and lecturer at the College of St. Luke's. Mr. Soames
     was a tall, spare man, of a nervous and excitable temperament. I had
     always known him to be restless in his manner, but on this particular
     occasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it
     was clear something very unusual had occurred.

     "I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of your
     valuable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke's, and
     really, but for the happy chance of your being in the town, I should
     have been at a loss what to do."

     "I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friend
     answered. "I should much prefer that you called in the aid of the
     police."

     "No, no, my dear sir; such a course is utterly impossible. When once
     the law is evoked it cannot be stayed again, and this is just one of
     those cases where, for the credit of the college, it is most
     essential to avoid scandal. Your discretion is as well known as your
     powers, and you are the one man in the world who can help me. I beg
     you, Mr. Holmes, to do what you can."

     My friend's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the
     congenial surroundings of Baker Street. Without his scrap-books, his
     chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. He
     shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence, while our visitor
     in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth
     his story.

     "I must explain to you, Mr. Holmes, that to-morrow is the first day
     of the examination for the Fortescue Scholarship. I am one of the
     examiners. My subject is Greek, and the first of the papers consists
     of a large passage of Greek translation which the candidate has not
     seen. This passage is printed on the examination paper, and it would
     naturally be an immense advantage if the candidate could prepare it
     in advance. For this reason great care is taken to keep the paper
     secret.

     "To-day about three o'clock the proofs of this paper arrived from the
     printers. The exercise consists of half a chapter of Thucydides. I
     had to read it over carefully, as the text must be absolutely
     correct. At four-thirty my task was not yet completed. I had,
     however, promised to take tea in a friend's rooms, so I left the
     proof upon my desk. I was absent rather more than an hour.

     "You are aware, Mr. Holmes, that our college doors are double--a
     green baize one within and a heavy oak one without. As I approached
     my outer door I was amazed to see a key in it. For an instant I
     imagined that I had left my own there, but on feeling in my pocket I
     found that it was all right. The only duplicate which existed, so far
     as I knew, was that which belonged to my servant, Bannister, a man
     who has looked after my room for ten years, and whose honesty is
     absolutely above suspicion. I found that the key was indeed his, that
     he had entered my room to know if I wanted tea, and that he had very
     carelessly left the key in the door when he came out. His visit to my
     room must have been within a very few minutes of my leaving it. His
     forgetfulness about the key would have mattered little upon any other
     occasion, but on this one day it has produced the most deplorable
     consequences.

     "The moment I looked at my table I was aware that someone had
     rummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips. I had
     left them all together. Now, I found that one of them was lying on
     the floor, one was on the side table near the window, and the third
     was where I had left it."

     Holmes stirred for the first time.

     "The first page on the floor, the second in the window, the third
     where you left it," said he.

     "Exactly, Mr. Holmes. You amaze me. How could you possibly know
     that?"

     "Pray continue your very interesting statement."

     "For an instant I imagined that Bannister had taken the unpardonable
     liberty of examining my papers. He denied it, however, with the
     utmost earnestness, and I am convinced that he was speaking the
     truth. The alternative was that someone passing had observed the key
     in the door, had known that I was out, and had entered to look at the
     papers. A large sum of money is at stake, for the scholarship is a
     very valuable one, and an unscrupulous man might very well run a risk
     in order to gain an advantage over his fellows.

     "Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly fainted
     when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with. I
     gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair while I
     made a most careful examination of the room. I soon saw that the
     intruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpled
     papers. On the table in the window were several shreds from a pencil
     which had been sharpened. A broken tip of lead was lying there also.
     Evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry, had
     broken his pencil, and had been compelled to put a fresh point to
     it."

     "Excellent!" said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as his
     attention became more engrossed by the case. "Fortune has been your
     friend."

     "This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface of
     red leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that it was
     smooth and unstained. Now I found a clean cut in it about three
     inches long--not a mere scratch, but a positive cut. Not only this,
     but on the table I found a small ball of black dough, or clay, with
     specks of something which looks like sawdust in it. I am convinced
     that these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers. There
     were no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity. I was at
     my wits' ends, when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me that
     you were in the town, and I came straight round to put the matter
     into your hands. Do help me, Mr. Holmes! You see my dilemma. Either I
     must find the man or else the examination must be postponed until
     fresh papers are prepared, and since this cannot be done without
     explanation there will ensue a hideous scandal, which will throw a
     cloud not only on the college, but on the University. Above all
     things I desire to settle the matter quietly and discreetly."

     "I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as I
     can," said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat. "The case is
     not entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you in your room
     after the papers came to you?"

     "Yes; young Daulat Ras, an Indian student who lives on the same
     stair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination."

     "For which he was entered?"

     "Yes."

     "And the papers were on your table?"

     "To the best of my belief they were rolled up."

     "But might be recognised as proofs?"

     "Possibly."

     "No one else in your room?"

     "No."

     "Did anyone know that these proofs would be there?"

     "No one save the printer."

     "Did this man Bannister know?"

     "No, certainly not. No one knew."

     "Where is Bannister now?"

     "He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair. I
     was in such a hurry to come to you."

     "You left your door open?"

     "I locked up the papers first."

     "Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames, that unless the Indian student
     recognised the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered with them
     came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there."

     "So it seems to me."

     Holmes gave an enigmatic smile.

     "Well," said he, "let us go round. Not one of your cases,
     Watson--mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to. Now,
     Mr. Soames--at your disposal!"

      The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticed
     window on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college. A
     Gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground floor
     was the tutor's room. Above were three students, one on each story.
     It was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem.
     Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window. Then he approached
     it, and, standing on tiptoe with his neck craned, he looked into the
     room.

     "He must have entered through the door. There is no opening except
     the one pane," said our learned guide.

     "Dear me!" said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he glanced
     at our companion. "Well, if there is nothing to be learned here we
     had best go inside."

     The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room. We
     stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet.

     "I am afraid there are no signs here," said he. "One could hardly
     hope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quite
     recovered. You left him in a chair, you say; which chair?"

     "By the window there."

     "I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have finished
     with the carpet. Let us take the little table first. Of course, what
     has happened is very clear. The man entered and took the papers,
     sheet by sheet, from the central table. He carried them over to the
     window table, because from there he could see if you came across the
     courtyard, and so could effect an escape."

     "As a matter of fact he could not," said Soames, "for I entered by
     the side door."

     "Ah, that's good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see the
     three strips. No finger impressions--no! Well, he carried over this
     one first and he copied it. How long would it take him to do that,
     using every possible contraction? A quarter of an hour, not less.
     Then he tossed it down and seized the next. He was in the midst of
     that when your return caused him to make a very hurried retreat--very
     hurried, since he had not time to replace the papers which would tell
     you that he had been there. You were not aware of any hurrying feet
     on the stair as you entered the outer door?"

     "No, I can't say I was."

     "Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had, as
     you observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson. The
     pencil was not an ordinary one. It was above the usual size, with a
     soft lead; the outer colour was dark blue, the maker's name was
     printed in silver lettering, and the piece remaining is only about an
     inch and a half long. Look for such a pencil, Mr. Soames, and you
     have got your man. When I add that he possesses a large and very
     blunt knife, you have an additional aid."

     Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information. "I
     can follow the other points," said he, "but really, in this matter of
     the length--"

     Holmes held out a small chip with the letters NN and a space of clear
     wood after them.

     "You see?"

     "No, I fear that even now--"

     "Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others. What
     could this NN be? It is at the end of a word. You are aware that
     Johann Faber is the most common maker's name. Is it not clear that
     there is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows the
     Johann?" He held the small table sideways to the electric light. "I
     was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin some trace of
     it might come through upon this polished surface. No, I see nothing.
     I don't think there is anything more to be learned here. Now for the
     central table. This small pellet is, I presume, the black, doughy
     mass you spoke of. Roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, I
     perceive. As you say, there appear to be grains of sawdust in it.
     Dear me, this is very interesting. And the cut--a positive tear, I
     see. It began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I am
     much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, Mr.
     Soames. Where does that door lead to?"

     "To my bedroom."

     "Have you been in it since your adventure?"

     "No; I came straight away for you."

     "I should like to have a glance round. What a charming, old-fashioned
     room! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute until I have examined the
     floor. No, I see nothing. What about this curtain? You hang your
     clothes behind it. If anyone were forced to conceal himself in this
     room he must do it there, since the bed is too low and the wardrobe
     too shallow. No one there, I suppose?"

     As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity and
     alertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency. As
     a matter of fact the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three or
     four suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs. Holmes turned away
     and stooped suddenly to the floor.

     "Halloa! What's this?" said he.

     It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like the
     one upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his open palm
     in the glare of the electric light.

     "Your visitor seems to have left traces in your bedroom as well as in
     your sitting-room, Mr. Soames."

     "What could he have wanted there?"

     "I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way, and
     so he had no warning until you were at the very door. What could he
     do? He caught up everything which would betray him and he rushed into
     your bedroom to conceal himself."

     "Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that all the time
     I was talking to Bannister in this room we had the man prisoner if we
     had only known it?"

     "So I read it."

     "Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don't know
     whether you observed my bedroom window?"

     "Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one swinging
     on hinge and large enough to admit a man."

     "Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to be
     partly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance there,
     left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and, finally, finding
     the door open have escaped that way."

     Holmes shook his head impatiently.

     "Let us be practical," said he. "I understand you to say that there
     are three students who use this stair and are in the habit of passing
     your door?"

     "Yes, there are."

     "And they are all in for this examination?"

     "Yes."

     "Have you any reason to suspect any one of them more than the
     others?"

     Soames hesitated.

     "It is a very delicate question," said he. "One hardly likes to throw
     suspicion where there are no proofs."

     "Let us hear the suspicions. I will look after the proofs."

     "I will tell you, then, in a few words the character of the three men
     who inhabit these rooms. The lower of the three is Gilchrist, a fine
     scholar and athlete; plays in the Rugby team and the cricket team for
     the college, and got his Blue for the hurdles and the long jump. He
     is a fine, manly fellow. His father was the notorious Sir Jabez
     Gilchrist, who ruined himself on the turf. My scholar has been left
     very poor, but he is hard-working and industrious. He will do well.

     "The second floor is inhabited by Daulat Ras, the Indian. He is a
     quiet, inscrutable fellow, as most of those Indians are. He is well
     up in his work, though his Greek is his weak subject. He is steady
     and methodical.

     "The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellow
     when he chooses to work--one of the brightest intellects of the
     University, but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled. He was
     nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has been
     idling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to the
     examination."

     "Then it is he whom you suspect?"

     "I dare not go so far as that. But of the three he is perhaps the
     least unlikely."

     "Exactly. Now, Mr. Soames, let us have a look at your servant,
     Bannister."

     He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow of
     fifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the
     quiet routine of his life. His plump face was twitching with his
     nervousness, and his fingers could not keep still.

     "We are investigating this unhappy business, Bannister," said his
     master.

     "Yes, sir."

     "I understand," said Holmes, "that you left your key in the door?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the very
     day when there were these papers inside?"

     "It was most unfortunate, sir. But I have occasionally done the same
     thing at other times."

     "When did you enter the room?"

     "It was about half-past four. That is Mr. Soames's tea time."

     "How long did you stay?"

     "When I saw that he was absent I withdrew at once."

     "Did you look at these papers on the table?"

     "No, sir; certainly not."

     "How came you to leave the key in the door?"

     "I had the tea-tray in my hand. I thought I would come back for the
     key. Then I forgot."

     "Has the outer door a spring lock?"

     "No, sir."

     "Then it was open all the time?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "Anyone in the room could get out?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "When Mr. Soames returned and called for you, you were very much
     disturbed?"

     "Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years that
     I have been here. I nearly fainted, sir."

     "So I understand. Where were you when you began to feel bad?"

     "Where was I, sir? Why, here, near the door."

     "That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yonder
     near the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?"

     "I don't know, sir. It didn't matter to me where I sat."

     "I really don't think he knew much about it, Mr. Holmes. He was
     looking very bad--quite ghastly."

     "You stayed here when your master left?"

     "Only for a minute or so. Then I locked the door and went to my
     room."

     "Whom do you suspect?"

     "Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don't believe there is any
     gentleman in this University who is capable of profiting by such an
     action. No, sir, I'll not believe it."

     "Thank you; that will do," said Holmes. "Oh, one more word. You have
     not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend that
     anything is amiss?"

     "No, sir; not a word."

     "You haven't seen any of them?"

     "No, sir."

     "Very good. Now, Mr. Soames, we will take a walk in the quadrangle,
     if you please."

     Three yellow squares of light shone above us in the gathering gloom.

     "Your three birds are all in their nests," said Holmes, looking up.
     "Halloa! What's that? One of them seems restless enough."

     It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon his
     blind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.

     "I should like to have a peep at each of them," said Holmes. "Is it
     possible?"

     "No difficulty in the world," Soames answered. "This set of rooms is
     quite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for visitors
     to go over them. Come along, and I will personally conduct you."

     "No names, please!" said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist's door. A
     tall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and made us welcome
     when he understood our errand. There were some really curious pieces
     of mediaeval domestic architecture within. Holmes was so charmed with
     one of them that he insisted on drawing it on his note-book, broke
     his pencil, had to borrow one from our host, and finally borrowed a
     knife to sharpen his own. The same curious accident happened to him
     in the rooms of the Indian--a silent, little, hook-nosed fellow, who
     eyed us askance and was obviously glad when Holmes's architectural
     studies had come to an end. I could not see that in either case
     Holmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at the
     third did our visit prove abortive. The outer door would not open to
     our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad
     language came from behind it. "I don't care who you are. You can go
     to blazes!" roared the angry voice. "To-morrow's the exam, and I
     won't be drawn by anyone."

     "A rude fellow," said our guide, flushing with anger as we withdrew
     down the stair. "Of course, he did not realize that it was I who was
     knocking, but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous, and,
     indeed, under the circumstances rather suspicious."

     Holmes's response was a curious one.

     "Can you tell me his exact height?" he asked.

     "Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than the
     Indian, not so tall as Gilchrist. I suppose five foot six would be
     about it."

     "That is very important," said Holmes. "And now, Mr. Soames, I wish
     you good-night."

     Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. "Good gracious,
     Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in this abrupt
     fashion! You don't seem to realize the position. To-morrow is the
     examination. I must take some definite action to-night. I cannot
     allow the examination to be held if one of the papers has been
     tampered with. The situation must be faced."

     "You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrow
     morning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in a
     position then to indicate some course of action. Meanwhile you change
     nothing--nothing at all."

     "Very good, Mr. Holmes."

     "You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find some
     way out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay with me,
     also the pencil cuttings. Good-bye."

     When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle we again looked up
     at the windows. The Indian still paced his room. The others were
     invisible.

     "Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" Holmes asked, as we came out
     into the main street. "Quite a little parlour game--sort of
     three-card trick, is it not? There are your three men. It must be one
     of them. You take your choice. Which is yours?"

     "The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worst
     record. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also. Why should he be
     pacing his room all the time?"

     "There is nothing in that. Many men do it when they are trying to
     learn anything by heart."

     "He looked at us in a queer way."

     "So would you if a flock of strangers came in on you when you were
     preparing for an examination next day, and every moment was of value.
     No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives--all was
     satisfactory. But that fellow does puzzle me."

     "Who?"

     "Why, Bannister, the servant. What's his game in the matter?"

     "He impressed me as being a perfectly honest man."

     "So he did me. That's the puzzling part. Why should a perfectly
     honest man--well, well, here's a large stationer's. We shall begin
     our researches here."

     There were only four stationers of any consequence in the town, and
     at each Holmes produced his pencil chips and bid high for a
     duplicate. All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it was
     not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock. My
     friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure, but shrugged
     his shoulders in half-humorous resignation.

     "No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has run
     to nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can build up a
     sufficient case without it. By Jove! my dear fellow, it is nearly
     nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at seven-thirty. What
     with your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your irregularity at meals, I
     expect that you will get notice to quit and that I shall share your
     downfall--not, however, before we have solved the problem of the
     nervous tutor, the careless servant, and the three enterprising
     students."

      Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though he
     sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner. At
     eight in the morning he came into my room just as I finished my
     toilet.

     "Well, Watson," said he, "it is time we went down to St. Luke's. Can
     you do without breakfast?"

     "Certainly."

     "Soames will be in a dreadful fidget until we are able to tell him
     something positive."

     "Have you anything positive to tell him?"

     "I think so."

     "You have formed a conclusion?"

     "Yes, my dear Watson; I have solved the mystery."

     "But what fresh evidence could you have got?"

     "Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed at
     the untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours' hard work and
     covered at least five miles, with something to show for it. Look at
     that!"

     He held out his hand. On the palm were three little pyramids of
     black, doughy clay.

     "Why, Holmes, you had only two yesterday!"

     "And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever No. 3
     came from is also the source of Nos. 1 and 2. Eh, Watson? Well, come
     along and put friend Soames out of his pain."

      The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitation
     when we found him in his chambers. In a few hours the examination
     would commence, and he was still in the dilemma between making the
     facts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuable
     scholarship. He could hardly stand still, so great was his mental
     agitation, and he ran towards Holmes with two eager hands
     outstretched.

     "Thank Heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it up
     in despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?"

     "Yes; let it proceed by all means."

     "But this rascal--?"

     "He shall not compete."

     "You know him?"

     "I think so. If this matter is not to become public we must give
     ourselves certain powers, and resolve ourselves into a small private
     court-martial. You there, if you please, Soames! Watson, you here!
     I'll take the arm-chair in the middle. I think that we are now
     sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast. Kindly
     ring the bell!"

     Bannister entered, and shrunk back in evident surprise and fear at
     our judicial appearance.

     "You will kindly close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Bannister, will
     you please tell us the truth about yesterday's incident?"

     The man turned white to the roots of his hair.

     "I have told you everything, sir."

     "Nothing to add?"

     "Nothing at all, sir."

     "Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat down
     on that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal some
     object which would have shown who had been in the room?"

     Bannister's face was ghastly.

     "No, sir; certainly not."

     "It is only a suggestion," said Holmes, suavely. "I frankly admit
     that I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since the
     moment that Mr. Soames's back was turned you released the man who was
     hiding in that bedroom."

     Bannister licked his dry lips.

     "There was no man, sir."

     "Ah, that's a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken the
     truth, but now I know that you have lied."

     The man's face set in sullen defiance.

     "There was no man, sir."

     "Come, come, Bannister!"

     "No, sir; there was no one."

     "In that case you can give us no further information. Would you
     please remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom door.
     Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go
     up to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him to step down into
     yours."

     An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the student.
     He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile, with a springy
     step and a pleasant, open face. His troubled blue eyes glanced at
     each of us, and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay
     upon Bannister in the farther corner.

     "Just close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are all
     quite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what passes
     between us. We can be perfectly frank with each other. We want to
     know, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever came to commit
     such an action as that of yesterday?"

     The unfortunate young man staggered back and cast a look full of
     horror and reproach at Bannister.

     "No, no, Mr. Gilchrist, sir; I never said a word--never one word!"
     cried the servant.

     "No, but you have now," said Holmes. "Now, sir, you must see that
     after Bannister's words your position is hopeless, and that your only
     chance lies in a frank confession."

     For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control his
     writhing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees beside
     the table and, burying his face in his hands, he had burst into a
     storm of passionate sobbing.

     "Come, come," said Holmes, kindly; "it is human to err, and at least
     no one can accuse you of being a callous criminal. Perhaps it would
     be easier for you if I were to tell Mr. Soames what occurred, and you
     can check me where I am wrong. Shall I do so? Well, well, don't
     trouble to answer. Listen, and see that I do you no injustice.

     "From the moment, Mr. Soames, that you said to me that no one, not
     even Bannister, could have told that the papers were in your room,
     the case began to take a definite shape in my mind. The printer one
     could, of course, dismiss. He could examine the papers in his own
     office. The Indian I also thought nothing of. If the proofs were in a
     roll he could not possibly know what they were. On the other hand, it
     seemed an unthinkable coincidence that a man should dare to enter the
     room, and that by chance on that very day the papers were on the
     table. I dismissed that. The man who entered knew that the papers
     were there. How did he know?

     "When I approached your room I examined the window. You amused me by
     supposing that I was contemplating the possibility of someone having
     in broad daylight, under the eyes of all these opposite rooms, forced
     himself through it. Such an idea was absurd. I was measuring how tall
     a man would need to be in order to see as he passed what papers were
     on the central table. I am six feet high, and I could do it with an
     effort. No one less than that would have a chance. Already you see I
     had reason to think that if one of your three students was a man of
     unusual height he was the most worth watching of the three.

     "I entered and I took you into my confidence as to the suggestions of
     the side table. Of the centre table I could make nothing, until in
     your description of Gilchrist you mentioned that he was a
     long-distance jumper. Then the whole thing came to me in an instant,
     and I only needed certain corroborative proofs, which I speedily
     obtained.

     "What happened was this. This young fellow had employed his afternoon
     at the athletic grounds, where he had been practising the jump. He
     returned carrying his jumping shoes, which are provided, as you are
     aware, with several sharp spikes. As he passed your window he saw, by
     means of his great height, these proofs upon your table, and
     conjectured what they were. No harm would have been done had it not
     been that as he passed your door he perceived the key which had been
     left by the carelessness of your servant. A sudden impulse came over
     him to enter and see if they were indeed the proofs. It was not a
     dangerous exploit, for he could always pretend that he had simply
     looked in to ask a question.

     "Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then that
     he yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table. What was it
     you put on that chair near the window?"

     "Gloves," said the young man.

     Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. "He put his gloves on the
     chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them. He
     thought the tutor must return by the main gate, and that he would see
     him. As we know, he came back by the side gate. Suddenly he heard him
     at the very door. There was no possible escape. He forgot his gloves,
     but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom. You observe
     that the scratch on that table is slight at one side, but deepens in
     the direction of the bedroom door. That in itself is enough to show
     us that the shoe had been drawn in that direction and that the
     culprit had taken refuge there. The earth round the spike had been
     left on the table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in the
     bedroom. I may add that I walked out to the athletic grounds this
     morning, saw that tenacious black clay is used in the jumping-pit,
     and carried away a specimen of it, together with some of the fine tan
     or sawdust which is strewn over it to prevent the athlete from
     slipping. Have I told the truth, Mr. Gilchrist?"

     The student had drawn himself erect.

     "Yes, sir, it is true," said he.

     "Good heavens, have you nothing to add?" cried Soames.

     "Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has
     bewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to you
     early this morning in the middle of a restless night. It was before I
     knew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You will see that
     I have said, 'I have determined not to go in for the examination. I
     have been offered a commission in the Rhodesian Police, and I am
     going out to South Africa at once.'"

     "I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by
     your unfair advantage," said Soames. "But why did you change your
     purpose?"

     Gilchrist pointed to Bannister.

     "There is the man who set me in the right path," said he.

     "Come now, Bannister," said Holmes. "It will be clear to you from
     what I have said that only you could have let this young man out,
     since you were left in the room, and must have locked the door when
     you went out. As to his escaping by that window, it was incredible.
     Can you not clear up the last point in this mystery, and tell us the
     reasons for your action?"

     "It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known; but with all your
     cleverness it was impossible that you could know. Time was, sir, when
     I was butler to old Sir Jabez Gilchrist, this young gentleman's
     father. When he was ruined I came to the college as servant, but I
     never forgot my old employer because he was down in the world. I
     watched his son all I could for the sake of the old days. Well, sir,
     when I came into this room yesterday when the alarm was given, the
     very first thing I saw was Mr. Gilchrist's tan gloves a-lying in that
     chair. I knew those gloves well, and I understood their message. If
     Mr. Soames saw them the game was up. I flopped down into that chair,
     and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you. Then out
     came my poor young master, whom I had dandled on my knee, and
     confessed it all to me. Wasn't it natural, sir, that I should save
     him, and wasn't it natural also that I should try to speak to him as
     his dead father would have done, and make him understand that he
     could not profit by such a deed? Could you blame me, sir?"

     "No, indeed," said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet. "Well,
     Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up, and our
     breakfast awaits us at home. Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trust
     that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For once you have fallen
     low. Let us see in the future how high you can rise."









